From files to chunks (#2475)
huggingface/blog: from-files-to-chunks.md

---
title: "From Files to Chunks: Improving HF Storage Efficiency"
thumbnail: /blog/assets/from-files-to-chunks/thumbnail.png
authors:
  - user: jsulz
  - user: erinys
---

# From Files to Chunks: Improving HF Storage Efficiency

> Hugging Face stores over [30 PB of models, datasets, and spaces](https://huggingface.co/spaces/xet-team/lfs-analysis) in [Git LFS repositories](https://huggingface.co/docs/hub/en/repositories-getting-started#requirements). Because Git stores and versions at the file level, any change to a file requires re-uploading the full asset – expensive operations when average Parquet and CSV files on the Hub range between 200-300 MB, average Safetensor files around around 1 GB, and GGUF files can exceed 8 GB. Imagine modifying just a single line of metadata in a GGUF file and waiting for the multi-gigabyte file to upload; in addition to user time and transfer costs, Git LFS also then needs to save full versions of both files, bloating storage costs.

Reviewer: The Space is awesome. Perhaps we could present the first plot here as a screenshot to provide some visual info.

Author: Thank you! And great feedback 😄 

I added a plot below this paragraph.

> The Xet team is taking a different approach to storage by storing files as chunks. By only transferring modified chunks, we can dramatically improve both storage efficiency and iteration speed while ensuring reliable access to evolving datasets and models. Here’s how it works.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hugging Face's Xet team is taking a different approach to storage by storing files as chunks. By only transferring modified chunks, we can dramatically improve both storage efficiency and iteration speed while ensuring reliable access to evolving datasets and models. Here’s how it works.
```

Maybe, for additional context?

## Content-Defined Chunking Foundations

The method that we use to chunk files is called content-defined chunking (CDC). Instead of treating a file as an indivisible unit, CDC breaks files down into variable-sized chunks, using the data to define boundaries. To compute the chunks, we apply a [rolling hash algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rolling_hash) that scans the file’s byte sequence.

Consider a file with the contents:

```bash
transformerstransformerstransformers
```

We’re using text for illustration, but this could be any sequence of bytes.

A rolling hash algorithm computes a hash over a sliding window of data. In this case, with a window of length 4 the hash would be computed first over `tran`, then `rans`, then `ansf` and so on until the end of the file.

Chunk boundaries are determined when a hash satisfies a predefined condition, such as:

```
hash(data) % 2^12 == 0

> ```

Reviewer: Interesting! It may not be initially obvious to readers that the condition is arbitrary because hash values are distributed uniformly, but I'm not sure it's worth going into more detail at this point.

Author: Indeed - this is a very dense topic! I'm working on a future post that describes the rationale behind chunk size and hash conditions in more detail so I think it's fine to leave this ambiguous for now.

| Metric                | Git LFS-backed Repository | Xet-backed Repository |
| --------------------- | ------------------------- | --------------------- |
| Average Download Time | 51 minutes                | 19 minutes            |
| Average Upload Time   | 47 minutes                | 24 minutes            |
| Storage Used          | 8.9 GB                    | 3.52 GB               |

By only transferring and saving modified chunks, the Xet-backed repository using CDC (alongside various techniques to improve compression and streamline network requests) showed significantly faster upload/download times and drastically cut the amount of storage required to capture all versions of the dataset. Curious to learn more? Read the [full benchmark](https://xethub.com/blog/benchmarking-the-modern-development-experience).

## What CDC means for the Hub

> How would CDC work on the types of files stored on Hugging Face Hub? We threw together a simple [deduplication estimator](https://github.com/huggingface/dedupe_estimator) to visualize the potential storage savings of applying CDC to a collection of files. Running this tool on two versions of `model.safetensors` file in [openai-community/gpt2](https://huggingface.co/openai-community/gpt2) uploaded over the course of the repository's commit history returned the following result:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
How would CDC work on the types of files stored on Hugging Face Hub? We threw together a simple [deduplication estimator](https://github.com/huggingface/dedupe_estimator) to visualize the potential storage savings of applying CDC to a collection of files. Running this tool on two versions of the `model.safetensors` file in [openai-community/gpt2](https://huggingface.co/openai-community/gpt2) uploaded over the course of the repository's commit history returned the following result:
```

---
title: "From Files to Chunks: Improving HF Storage Efficiency"
thumbnail: /blog/assets/from-files-to-chunks/thumbnail.png
authors:
  - user: jsulz
  - user: erinys
---

# From Files to Chunks: Improving HF Storage Efficiency

> Hugging Face stores over [30 PB of models, datasets, and spaces](https://huggingface.co/spaces/xet-team/lfs-analysis) in [Git LFS repositories](https://huggingface.co/docs/hub/en/repositories-getting-started#requirements). Because Git stores and versions at the file level, any change to a file requires re-uploading the full asset – expensive operations when average Parquet and CSV files on the Hub range between 200-300 MB, average Safetensor files around around 1 GB, and GGUF files can exceed 8 GB. Imagine modifying just a single line of metadata in a GGUF file and waiting for the multi-gigabyte file to upload; in addition to user time and transfer costs, Git LFS also then needs to save full versions of both files, bloating storage costs.

Reviewer 2: you could mention from the get go that this is one of the reason we are switching away from LFS to Xet

Reviewer 2: (linking to the xethub-joins-hf blogpost, etc)

In this case, using our Xet-based storage backend would save considerable upload/download time for the second version, as well as reduce the total storage footprint by 53%. With compression, we estimate an additional 10% of savings.

Our initial research into repositories across the Hub shows positive results for some fine-tuned models and many model checkpoints. Fine-tuned models modify only a subset of parameters, so most of the model remains unchanged across versions, making them a great candidate for deduplication. Model checkpoints, which capture incremental training states, are also good targets as changes between checkpoints are often minimal. Both show deduplication ratios in the range of 30-85%. PyTorch model checkpoints make up around 200 TB of total storage on the Hub. At 50% deduplication, we would save up to 100 TB of storage immediately and roughly 7-8 TB monthly going forward.

Beyond reducing storage costs, chunk-level deduplication also improves upload/download speeds, as only the modified chunks are transferred. This is a great benefit to teams working with multiple versions of models or datasets as it minimizes user and machine waiting time.

> Our team is currently working through our POC of Xet-backed storage for the Hub and hope to roll out some Xet-backed repositories in early 2025. [Follow us](https://huggingface.co/xet-team) to learn more as we share our learnings on future topics like scaling CDC across globally distributed repositories, balancing network performance, privacy boundaries, and parallelizing our chunking algorithm.

Reviewer 2: > Our team is currently working through our POC of Xet-backed storage for the Hub and hope to roll out some Xet-backed repositories in early 2025.

sure hope too:)
